Hello, everyone.
In this lesson, we're going to learn how to create a new database table, let's jump into the action.
So in our previous lesson, we set up this pet adoption area and it's using custom post types.
Now, I don't want us to delete this custom post type plugin because I want you to have it around and
available for testing and comparing speeds against.
So we don't need to delete it.
But let's go deactivate this plugin.
And that way we can start creating a brand new plug in that's recreating the same functionality but
using a custom database table.
So do this with me right now.
Let's go deactivate that plugin.
So in the admin sidebar under plug ins, I'm just going to scroll through the list and look for the
one called Pet Adoption Custom Post Type and deactivated.
Cool.
So it's always available for you to reactivate later on.
If you want to compare the speeds of the custom post type approach with the custom table approach.
Before we start working on our new plug in, let's review our goal really quick.
So if I look at my database, we've seen that the database has one table for posts, another for post
meta.
Well, in this video, we're going to learn how to create an entirely separate table called pets.
And the structure of that database table is going to be optimized or designed with pets in mind.
So let's go ahead and get started.
However, at this point in the course, we've already created many plug ins together.
So to save ourselves from a lot of boilerplate typing, that has nothing to do with databases.
I actually want you to download a starter zip file for this lesson so you'll find a downloadable resource
associated with the lesson called new database table dot zip.
So you can pause the video if you need to, but go ahead and download this file and then extract it
directly inside the new folder.
There should be a text file, a PDF file and an ANC folder.
OK, and we just want to move this into our WordPress installation folder.
So you're looking for the WordPress folder where you see WP content inside there.
We're looking in the plugins folder and then I'm just going to drag this new database table folder to
sit alongside our other plugins while we're at it.
Now that it's in the correct location, let's open this folder up in VST code, OK?
And we'll dig into the code very shortly.
But for now, let's go activate this new plugin.
So back in the admin dashboard, you can refresh the plugin screen and now we're looking down towards
the bottom.
Maybe so now we have two pet adoption plug ins, but one is custom post type and one is new database
table.
This way you can activate and deactivate and sort of switch between them if you ever want to compare
the speeds or do a speed test between the two.
But let's go ahead and activate new DB table and are plug in.
Doesn't really do anything yet.
We need to bring it to life.
So let's go look at the code.
Let's jump into the main file.
So new database table that for the most part, this is just boilerplate code that we've seen before.
But one new detail that I do want to draw your attention to is this first add action line.
And I want you to pay attention to this hook name.
This hook is super useful.
It will only run when the plugin gets activated.
It'll just run that one time now.
Yes, you can deactivate the plug in and then when you reactivate the plug in, this will run again.
But the point is you can have code in here that isn't just going to keep running constantly.
So it's simply activate, underscore.
And then from this point forward, it's dynamic.
So it's whatever the name of your plug in folder is and then the name of your main file.
And then you can see I made up a method name of on activate that will run when this fires.
So let's talk about why this is useful in our current situation.
So sure, we might want to load data from our database table all the time or save new data to it all
the time.
But we only need to create the skeleton or structure or shape of that table once.
So when we're saying how many columns there should be, what the name of each column is and what type
of data at stores, we don't need to keep running that initial setup code over and over again.
We can just run it when the plugin is activated.
So within this empty on activate function, let's do that.
So inside this function, let's use a WordPress function called DBI and then uppercase Delta semicolon
at the end.
Inside the parentheses, we just give it a string of text and we just give it a sequel statement to
create a new table.
This is a super useful function that WordPress gives to us because if it runs again in the future,
it isn't going to wipe.
About the table, we're not going to lose any data, it won't delete the table and then recreate it
a second time instead, if we think about what the word delta means, right, it's the change.
So if we ever deactivated our plug in and then reactivated again, WordPress is smart enough to compare
the difference between the way that our table is currently in the actual database compared to what we're
telling it.
It should be here now before we actually write the sequel command to create a new table, I first need
to let you know that unfortunately we can't just access DB Delta directly like this.
So DB Delta is not just always available like this, but maybe on the line right before that.
We can simply say require once parentheses, semicolon, and now we can just require a WordPress system
file that will indeed make DB Delta available.
So we can say ABB's path dot concatenate on a string WP dash admin slash includes slash upgrade dot
HP.
Before we go any further, I do want to let you know that the first time I saw this, I thought that
it seemed like a gimmick or a hack or like a weird unofficial way of doing things.
But trust me, in the official WordPress documentation, this is how they demonstrate how to create
a custom table anyways inside the DB Delta parentheses inside the string here, let's actually start
writing our sequel command to create a table.
So we'll just say create an all uppercase table in all uppercase and let's Naimark table lowercase pets'
will actually circle back to the table name in just a moment.
But for now, to keep things simple, let's go with this.
Let's have a space and then a pair of parentheses and then in between the parentheses we need to dropdown.
OK, now we just start spelling out the columns for our table.
Let's have the first column be called IDE and it will use the data type of big int parentheses will
say twenty unsigned.
Let's say that it cannot be left empty so not null and we want it to auto increment this way.
You and I won't need to manually make up a numeric ID number for each part, let's say comma and then
you do need to have a new line for each column.
So let's have another column called Birth Year.
It can be a small integers or small int five.
It's required so not null and it can have a default value of zero comma.
But I have another column called Pet Wait.
It can be a small integer so small int five.
We don't want it to be able to be left blank and it can have default of zero as well.
Comma, let's have fav food.
This will be of a type var car with the limit of 60 characters not.
Let's have a default of just an empty string comma to save typing.
Let's actually just copy and paste and duplicate this fav foodline because the next four are going to
be almost identical.
So let's just copy and paste that a few times.
So after Fey food will have fav Hobbie after that will have fav color.
After that let's have pet name and then finally let's have Species' at the end of this line after the
let's drop down and have another line and say primary key and then this seems really unintuitive or
weird but you need to have not one but two spaces after the word key here.
So key and then one, two spaces parentheses.
And we're just saying that the ID column is our main way of indexing or having a key for this table.
Now, if you're anything like me, you might be wondering how in the world were we supposed to know
to have two spaces here, or how are we supposed to know that each one of the columns needs to be on
its own line?
Well, we can look at the official WordPress documentation.
So the codex of WordPress on creating or updating a table.
And you can see they have all of these different rules here.
So they're letting you know that the DB Delta function is very sensitive and very particular.
So here are a review of the rules.
Each field needs to be on its own line.
You must have two spaces between the words primary key and the definition of your primary key.
You must use the word key rather than its synonym index, so on and so forth.
In other words, if you didn't type this out exactly like me and your code doesn't work in a couple
of minutes here, when we test this out, you might need to go back with an extreme attention to detail.
Or you can always download my files, my finished files at the end of this lesson.
Anyways, let's keep moving forward.
We're almost ready to test this code out.
So right after the primary key line, we.
Do not need a comma, however, after this closing parentheses, but before the closing quote, so space
right here and we need to tell sequel which character set we're using now.
This is not a value that we want to assume.
And just hard code right here.
It's a dynamic value that we want to pull from WordPress.
But for now, just as a placeholder, let's say, charoset or just any placeholder text that we can
circle back to, OK, and then finally end that with a semicolon right before the closing quotes.
So we'll circle back to what this value should be.
Right now, we're going to not only learn how to make this dynamic, but also the table name dynamic,
because if we go look at our database in advance, notice that each table has a prefix of WP underscore
now.
Yes, WP underscore is the default or standard prefix, but each installation of WordPress can customize
that when you set up WordPress the first time.
So again, this value of WP underscore is not something that we want to assume in hard code.
So we would not just want to say WP underscore Pets' here.
So let me get rid of that underscore here.
In order to find those dynamic values of the database prefix and the character set, we need to use
the global object called WP DB.
Now, we absolutely could access that here within this function, but I have a hunch that we're going
to need values from it elsewhere in our class here.
Right.
Maybe in some of our other functions.
So what I like to do is store those dynamic values up in our constructor function on this object of
our class.
Let me show you what I mean.
So within our construct function, let's add a new line inside that and let's say we're going to use
the global dollar sign, WP, DB semicolon, OK?
And now we can look inside this for both the database prefix and the character set.
So do this on a new line.
Let's say dollar sign this, go inside it with dash greater than and let's just make up a property name.
We can call it anything.
I'll call it character center care set and set that to equal dollar sign wp db.
Look inside that dash greater than get care set coalgate parentheses to call that semicolon.
So now we can access this property from anywhere in any of the methods in our class.
Let's do the same thing for the database table prefix so we can say this.
Let's make up a property name, I'll call it a table name and right here I'll just combine the prefix
with Pets' so we don't have to ever spell that out again.
So I'll just say dollar sign wp db look inside it for prefix and then I'm going to concatenate on just
string of text of pets semicolon at the end there.
OK, now let's just go use these two new properties down in our code.
So if we go back down into on activate let's hollow out the table name.
So instead of pets this would now be dollar sign this look inside it for table name and then let's do
the same thing for character set down here.
So leave the semicolon but we'll say a dollar.
Sign this.
Look inside it for care set.
Let's go ahead and save this and test it out.
Now remember, this code is only going to run when you're plug in is activated.
So to truly test this out, we need to go into the admin dashboard and deactivate our pet adoption new
DB table deactivated and then go back down and just reactivate that exact same plugin so that action
hook will fire.
And now to see if that code was successful or not, just go into ATM and refresh.
And you're looking in this left hand side bar for a new table named WP.
Underscore Pets'.
If you don't see this, you might just want to download my reference file at the end of this video and
you can either use it or compare your code against it.
But as you can see, it should be working now.
And if we click on that table, perfect.
It has all of the columns that we want.
So now let's practice actually adding a pet into this table.
Now, we don't currently have a form that admin users could fill out and submit.
We'll add that in a future lesson.
But for now, just as a test to add something into this table back in our code, let's just use this
on admin refresh function.
So up towards the top, we have this action admin head and we're calling that method on admin refresh.
So this will run any time you reload or refresh the admin side of WordPress.
So just as a test within this function, let's try to insert a record into our.
Table, so in this function, I'll begin by saying Global Dollar Sign WPE Debe, OK, and now we can
actually use WP DB so a dollar sign DB look inside it for a method named insert parentheses semicolon.
And now we just give this to arguments.
So the first argument is the table name that you want to insert a record into.
So we know that that's WP underscore Pets', but we don't want a hard code that so we can just pull
from that variable or property we set on our overall class.
So that would just be dollar sign this look inside it for table name.
OK, then the second argument, we just give it an array and this is the actual data that you'd want
to save.
Now, you could type this out if you want to, but I'm going to paste something in that you won't have
in your clipboard.
But essentially you just give it an array where each item has a matching name to each database column
that we created.
So you could spell this out manually.
Let me control Z, your command Z undo, however, just for the purpose of populating our table.
And so you don't have to type out a bunch of boilerplate example array code.
This is the entire point of my Generate Pett function.
So for the second argument, just call generate Pett.
If you're curious what this function is doing, you can look inside the ANC folder, jump into the file
called Generate Pett.
And essentially all this function does, when you call it is it returns an array with randomly generated
birthweight name species' color food and Hobbie.
Cool.
So this way we can just reuse that again and again as a test.
OK, at this point let's go ahead and save this file and then to test it out, we just go into the admin
dashboard and reload, OK?
And then to check to see if it did anything.
We can go back into administrator and click select data for our pets table and perfect.
So its randomly generated.
You and I will have a very different pet.
But you can see mine is a hedgehog that was born in two thousand eight with a favorite hobby of chasing
stuff.
So to test that out again you can just keep refreshing.
So I'll refresh a second time and a third time.
Go back into administration now.
I should have three.
Yep.
So I have two hedgehogs and one chicken.
Now you might be thinking, what if we want to populate this table with 100000 pet records?
Well, we definitely don't want to have to refresh the admin one hundred thousand times.
So let me show you what we can do.
If we look down towards the very bottom of this file, you'll notice that I've already created a function
for us called Populate Fast.
Now, this portion of the lesson is not meant to be educational.
Do not worry.
In a future lesson, we are going to learn how to write SQL statements ourselves.
However, just for right now, just for the purposes of getting example data into the table, this function
will create 100000 pets.
So once we finish this chapter and we've learned a little bit about writing SQL statements, you can
always circle back to this function if you're curious how it's working.
But essentially, I'm just creating a really long SQL statement that's going to insert 100000 items
anyways.
To use this, we can just go back towards the top of this file.
In our construct function, we're looking for the action of admin head and just change the method we're
calling from on admin refresh.
Just change it to populate fast.
Let's give that a save.
And now if I go to the admin dashboard and refresh, it'll take maybe two or three seconds or on a slow
computer.
It might take five or ten seconds.
You can see almost immediately it finished.
And if I go into admin and refresh, I now have a hundred well one hundred thousand and three from the
original three we created.
Cool.
Now just to make sure you don't accidentally create even more, what you could do is just comment out
this line entirely so that nothing is running on every admin refresh.
Give that a save.
And now we have plenty of data to sink our teeth into.
And in our next lesson, we're just going to continue learning more and more about working with sequel
to be more specific in our next lesson.
If I go to the front end of my site and at the end of the homepage you if I visit Pet Dasch Adoption,
well, we're going to learn how to make this template actually come to life and actually load in data
from our custom table.
Let's keep things rolling and I'll see you then.